---
layout: post
---
A few weeks ago, I read an article in The Atlantic about a format change to Late Night with Seth Meyers. The piece itself wasn't extroardinary, but it contained an interesting reflection from Meyers about the format of the late-night genre. .I don't think these are traditions as much as they.re structures that have proved they can bear comedy weight. That.s the reason people keep using them."

In the last six months three software products I support have transitioned from growth to solid maturity. As the transition has occured I've been reflecting on the software, looking for what has gone well and what hasn't. This mindset is what Meyers' comments resonated with.

Even in a medium as foreign to development as late night comedy, the key to success and mastery is learning what structures to rely on. Euclid is calling out from his grave. 

Returning to my maturing products here are the structures that have borne incredible weights for us.

 1. ETL: Perhaps the best decision we ever did was to use the ETL pattern for a few early modules. In .net land that meant we made three interfaces IRead, IMap, IWrite. We have been able to reuse these interfaces again and again in every context we support. I even find myself writing one time HTTP Request handling code as IMaps now which doesn't hurt and has on a number of occasions made it real easy for us to migrate front end reports to back end scheduled jobs.
 2. URL: A change we made midstream was to begin using URLs for non web related resources. For a few projects we need to reference a specific table so we started having three separate columns: server, database, table. Maintaining these columns was a pain. So we defined our own custom table scheme table://<server>/<database>/[<schema>]/<table>. We now have tons of these (e.g. user://, email:// and grid://).
 3. Unit Tests: I know everyone says it, but I am still amazed by how many projects I've worked on without them. We knew that we'd be supporting our applications for years so we decided it was worth building an entire library just to make tests more eaesy to write and maintain. At least 5 times a day (the approximate number of times I run the tests each day) I think to myself, "thank God we did that."
 4. Universal DTO: As with Unit Tests this one took a moderate amount of upfront work and only paid itself off over years. When moving information from the database, up to the web server, into the database or wherever we started to have lots of small one off Data Transfer Objects that had no function other than carrying data. To remedy this, in .net land again, we create an IRow interface that was basically a simplified dictionary. We then created type converters that allow us to easily move between objects to our IRow interface. No more one off DTO's needed. The other benefit was we were able to optimize our IRow implementations and test them thoroughly making our code highly dependable.
 5. Composition over Inheritance: This one I got from the good old Gang of Four. Not much to say here other than we often find ourselves regretting decisions to use inheritance. There have been times when inheritance has been nice but those times are rare and usually involve incredbily simple classes (like the URL's mentioned above). To replace inheritance as a strategy for sharing functionality we have relied heavily on a Utility library.
 6. Utility (aka Shared or Tools): A wise developer once told me, "not everything has to be an object. It's alright to have some one off static utility methods." When we are running full speed towards a deadline throwing quick helpful functions into a universal pool can be a life saver. After some time has passed we will come back to our utility methods and with enough of them in one spot ways to organize them become much more obvious where looking at each method individually didn't immediately show where it belonged. 

Well there you have it. Those are the structures my team and company rely on every day to keep our software moving forward. They have all become like good friends, having saved us many times from dreaded, unforseen design-problems.

To rely on another tried and true pattern I will close with where I started. The Atlantic article ended with a Meryers' quote on the importance of also having opportunities that let you break form as well, "It.s nice right now that there are so many places that are letting you do comedy and just getting out of the way."
