---
layout: post
title : What's A $100 Between Friends
---
For the last two years I've worked as a computer programmer in the [recovery auditing][1] industry. At a high-level that means I've written software to discover and correct errors in financial records. Software, by its very nature, is an abstraction built on top of some reality. Usually the abstracted reality is itself physical. With financial software, however, that isn't the case, since money is also an abstraction. Given this situation I've been thinking a lot about the true nature of my work. Ignoring the question of "what is money", I'd like to detail my thoughts. 

First, let's create a concrete scenario we can test our answers against during our search. Let's imagine there are two companies, Acme and Omega. Ten years ago Acme hired Omega to install doors at one of their stores for $100. After the installation Omega accidentally sent Acme two invoices. Acme, remodeling several stores simultaneously, didn't notice and paid both invoices. For ten years, this mistake went undiscovered until my software found it and requested that Omega reimburse Alpha for the original $100. For finding this mistake I charged Acme $10.

There are a couple trivial narratives for what just happened. We will examine these first before moving to a more complex -- and correct -- narrative. This approach has twoo benefits. One, the form of our desired answer will slowly become more apparrent as we fill in the negative space around it. Two, our final answer will be more defensible after taking the wind out of what most immediately appeals to our intuition.

Perhaps the most trivial answer is that $100 was freed that can now be spent on other productive services. This is certainly the case for Acme, who was just reimbursed $100, but we need to remember that we are interested in discovering societie's gain. We need to consider the complete impact on both Acme and Omega. When combining Omega's $100 loss with Acme's $100 gain the net amount "freed" is $0. To further make this point, let's remember that I charged Acme $10 for my service. Including my service however, we are still at $0 because while Acme loses $10 I gain $10. So, while Acme and I gain in this exchange, if we want to find how society gains we'll have to look for an answer beyond simple financial reckoning.

After finances the next most trivial answer is justice. At least Acme is no longer paying twice what they agreed to. However, as before, this answer only holds up when we keep our focus narrowed to one player. If we step back we have to contend with the fairness of the original deal. Perhaps Acme has a monopoly and manipulated Omega into providing their services at a greatly reduced rate. Or maybe Omega has the monopoly and charged Acme an exorbatent rate under threat of a mysterious fire. Either way, by enforcing the original deal, we have actually reinforced injustice.

While it is easy to find value or justice for any individual actor in our narrative we still haven't explained what society gains. Luckily we are actually fairly close. Instead of financial value society gains power. The power for people to ask one another to rectify past wrongs. The power to exchange money without resorting to violence. The power to make sure the our best performing organizations can thrive. Then in place of justice society gains efficiency. Instead of having to look at every single transaction when arbitrating between two parties society can simply look at the situation trusting auditors to enforce the transactions. This makes it much cheaper to create change and justice when it is needed. In short, my work helps to create an environment where successful organizations can thrive.

This line of thinking brings us to the soft under-belly of capitalism. It has value because, when it involves money, we are all, by and large, obedient. Whether that is installing windows or correcting a 10 year old mistake. This obedience and balance is in no way required by [natural laws][2] as transactions in nature are. This obedience simply comes from generations of imparted cultural heritage. The obedience also becomes both savior and master. Savior, because by it we can influence our world without needing to resort to force. Master, because by it we can replace our deeper motivations with a more brittle veneer of greed. And so each day I encrouage obedience from all, big and small.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recovery_Auditing
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First_law_of_thermodynamics
